#PPVN/VETS10020 

---
# What it affects
Brachycephalic Obstructive Airway Syndrome (BOAS) affects the French Bulldog, Bulldog, Pug, Pekingese, Shih Tzu, Japanese Chin, Boxer and Boston terrier are all examples of BOAS breeds. The most distinctive feature of these breeds is their short muzzle

Breeding selection for extreme brachycephalic features has resulted in dogs that are predisposed to upper airway tract obstruction and subsequent respiratory distress, amongst various other health issues.

## Pathophysiology
#### Anatomical components:
##### Shortening of the skull and upper airway tract lesions
- In brachycephalic dogs, while the length of the skeletal muzzle is reduced there is often no corresponding decrease in the size of the soft tissue contained in the skull. This results in a constricted effect within the nasal cavity and partial obstruction of the pharynx and larynx

##### Upper airway tract obstruction and poor thermoregulation
- Excessive selection for brachycephaly has deformed the upper airway tract and resulted in obstructions. Affected brachycephalic dogs must increase their inspiratory effort to overcome the resistance generated by the upper airway obstruction and thus achieve sufficient ventilation.
- This increased inspiratory effort generates a high negative pressure that sucks the soft tissues into the lumen of the airway passage. Eventually, these tissues become hyperplastic and the laryngeal cartilages collapse, further exacerbating the airway obstruction. If this cycle is left uninterrupted the dog may develop [[Pulmonary Oedema]], reduced arterial oxygen content, hypertension and right-side heart failure.
- In addition to the respiratory function, BOAS also affects the crucial thermoregulatory role of the canine airway. This is evident in the severe heat susceptibility seen in affected brachycephalic dogs. Dogs do not sweat. Instead, they lower their body heat by panting. When dogs with elongated skull shapes (like Labradors) pant, they are able to pass air quickly over the throat and nose. The dog cools down as saliva and moisture evaporate when air passes over the tongue and mucous membranes in the oral and nasal cavities. However in the affected dog, the airway tract becomes inflamed and swollen during the panting process. This results in greater obstruction and further over-heating
 - Another factor is obesity. Excessive weight results in fat tissue surrounding and narrowing the airway. 

### Clinical signs that brachycephalic dog owners should recognise
- [[Respiratory noise]]
- [[Stenotic nares]]
- Gastrointestinal signs
- Obstructive sleep apnoea / sleep-disordered breathing
- Heat intolerance
- [[Cyanosis]] and collapse